Guide how to enable keywords as identifiers #218 (#219)
eclipse-langium/langium-website: hugo/content/guides/keywords-as-identifiers/_index.md

---
title: "Keywords as Identifiers"
weight: 300
---

> When your language uses keywords, which is the usual case, e.g. `var`, `const` or `function` keywords in programming languages, all occurrances of these strings are treated by Langium as keyword tokens by default, even at places which are not intended by the rules in the Langium grammar.

Author: yes, sounds better, thanks!

> Additionally, these strings are marked like keywords (in blue in this guide, while other text is white) whenever they are used.

Reviewer: As @Lotes says
```suggestion
Additionally, these strings are always highlighted as _keyword_ (in blue in this guide, while other text is white).
```

Author: thanks, fixed

> Additionally, these strings are marked like keywords (in blue in this guide, while other text is white) whenever they are used.

Author: thanks, fixed

Summarizing, these keywords cannot be used as values for names, identifiers or other properties by default and need to be explicitly enabled.

> This guide explains, how to do that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide explains how to do that.
```

Author: done

> To keep this guide short, let's look at the "hello-world" example, in the [playground](https://langium.org/playground?grammar=OYJwhgthYgBAEgUwDbIPYHU0mQEwFD6IB2ALiAJ6wCyauKAXPrC7ABQAOiIAzmsTwDUAXgAK3PsVgAfWKESJSAS2LAhwgOIgFy1QEoAVAG5C43vyatYAci7ni12MUiJhASQAiJ-Fp0rglqzWSKhojnaSwgDaZpIMngC6NgCE1t4AFkq49FKk3BAqYMiwGADKDLAA9AA6QpUmeSAFzsWeFZVRAPpgALQAXgCCPQBaCVHVAO6dCQb1hJnZJLCNzUU0ADKdAMIA8tTUAKIAcgAq7dU1BuM81aUzAPzVBhdzCznL%2BYXFpZu7%2B8dnKoXC5RAB61WI1RAMzmQA&content=A4UwTgzg9gdgBAKQIYxAKABIgDbaolEAQjTVElji1yjSA) or as a new local project created with `yo langium` (for details, how to set up your first Langium project, read [getting started](/docs/getting-started/)):

Author: yes, sounds better, thanks!

![screenshot with the editor, an example and an error message](problem.png)

Here, it is not possible to introduce a person whose name is "Hello", since `Hello` is a dedicated keyword of the language. Additionally, we cannot greet a person called "Hello" as well.

> The same counts for the keyword "person", but in this guide, we focus on enabling "Hello" as name for persons. After reading this guide, you will be able to add support for "person" as name by your own.

Author: yes, sounds better, thanks!

> To enable keywords as identifiers, you need to apply the following three steps:

Author: AFAIK a comma is mandatory here

> 1. Tweak the grammar to explicitly parse keywords as property values.

Author: yes, sounds better, thanks!

2. Change the semantic type of the resulting token.

> 3. Ensure, that your editor supports styles for the chosen semantic type.

Author: done

> 

Reviewer 2: Your guide has these 3 parts. It would be nice to introduce headings, so that the reader can skip/fast forward easier.

Author: Yes, that would be very helpful, thanks! I added a TOC as well.

> The __first step__ is to tweak the grammar to explicitly parse keywords as property values:

Author: yes, sounds better, thanks!

At the moment, the parser rule for introducing persons looks like this:

```langium
Person: 'person' name=ID;
terminal ID: /[_a-zA-Z][\w_]*/;
```

> Note, that the terminal rule for `ID` already covers the string "Hello",

Author: fixed

> but since the parser rule for greeting persons uses "Hello" as keyword, the keyword wins:

Author: yes, sounds better, thanks!

```langium
Greeting: 'Hello' person=[Person:ID] '!';
```

> Roughly summarized, the background for this behaviour is, that Langium internally use [Chevrotain](https://chevrotain.io) for tokenizing, i.e. splitting text into single tokens, e.g. words separated by white space.

Author: yes, sounds better, thanks!

> Chevrotain uses regex for splitting text into tokens.

Author: yes, sounds better, thanks!

> Since keywords are realized as regex as well, *all* occurrances of "Hello" are treated as keywords for the parser rule for greetings,

Author: yes, sounds better, thanks!

![screenshot with supporting color theme](fixed-3-style-2.png)

Now "Hello" is marked in purple, when it is used as keyword, and in green, when it is used as value for the name of a person.
Another solution is to select a different semantic type for your token in step two.
A more elaborate solution is to create your own color theme and to ship it with your VS Code extension of your language.

While __step one__ is mandatory to enable keywords as values in general,
__step two__ improves the user experience of your language.
While step one and step two can be handled in the LSP server once for your language, __step three__ highly depends on your editor and its color themes (in the LSP clients), which makes step three quite complicated to handle.

Now you know, how to technically enable keywords as regular values for properties.
As home work, it is your task to enable the keyword "person" as name for persons in the example.
Whether it makes sense to support keywords as values in your language at all is up to you to discuss with the users of your language!

Some hints beyond this guide:

> - In [multi-grammar projects](/guides/multiple-languages), only keywords of the included grammars are affected by this general problem, but not keywords of other languages or Langium grammar files.

Reviewer 2: Is there a way to find out about all keywords? I think we have a constant somewhere ins the `ast.ts`, but I am not very sure about this.

Author: That is a good improvement, thank! I added a hint to the generated TextMate grammar.

---
title: "Keywords as Identifiers"
weight: 300
---

Langium treats keywords like `var`, `const` or `function` as keyword tokens, even at unintended locations according to your grammar.
Additionally, these strings are always highlighted as _keyword_ (in blue in this guide, while other text is white) whenever they are used.
Summarizing, these keywords cannot be used as values for names, identifiers or other properties by default and need to be explicitly enabled.

> This guide explains how to do that.

Author: Thanks for the suggestion, I used it (slightly adapted)!

![screenshot with the editor, an example and an error message](problem.png)

Here, it is not possible to introduce a person whose name is "Hello", since `Hello` is a dedicated keyword of the language. Additionally, we cannot greet a person called "Hello" as well.
The same applies to the keyword "person", but let's focus on enabling "Hello" as name for persons.

To enable keywords as identifiers, you need to apply the following three steps:

{{< toc format=html >}}

## Step 1: Modify the grammar to explicitly parse keywords as property values

The __first step__ is to modify the grammar to explicitly parse keywords as property values:

> At the moment, the parser rule for introducing persons looks like this:

Author: thanks, fixed

```langium
Person: 'person' name=ID;
terminal ID: /[_a-zA-Z][\w_]*/;
```

Note that the terminal rule for `ID` already covers the string "Hello",

> but since the parser rule for greeting persons uses "Hello" as keyword, the keyword takes precedence:

Author: changed

```langium
Greeting: 'Hello' person=[Person:ID] '!';
```

> Roughly summarized, the background for this behaviour is that Langium's internally used LL(k) parser implementation named [Chevrotain](https://chevrotain.io) first does _lexing_/tokenizing, i.e. splitting text into single tokens, e.g. words separated by white space.

Author: fixed

> Roughly summarized, the background for this behaviour is, that Langium's internally used LL(k) parser implementation named [Chevrotain](https://chevrotain.io) first does _lexing_/tokenizing, i.e. splitting text into single tokens, e.g. words separated by white space.

Reviewer: Long time ago, our professor in Kiel let us sing "in front of _that_ there is no comma"

```suggestion
Roughly summarized, the background for this behaviour is that Langium's internally used LL(k) parser implementation named [Chevrotain](https://chevrotain.io) first does _lexing_/tokenizing, i.e. splitting text into single tokens, e.g. words separated by white space.
```

Author: removed all comma before "that"

The actual _parsing_, i.e. the application of the parser rules, is performed afterwards on these tokens.
Chevrotain uses regular expressions (regex) for splitting text into tokens.

> Since keywords are implemented as regex as well and take precedence, _all_ occurrences of "Hello" are treated as keywords for the parser rule for greetings,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since keywords are implemented as regex as well and take precedence, _all_ occurrences of "Hello" are treated as keywords for the parser rule named `Greeting`,
```

Author: changed

> even "Hello" which are intented to be names, which finally causes the two errors in the "Problems" tab above.

Reviewer: Now I got this, maybe state it like
```suggestion
even a "Hello" intented to be a name, which finally causes the two syntax errors.
```

Author: changed

> even "Hello" which are intented to be names, which causes the parsing problems (see the two errors in the "Problems" tab above).

Author: Thanks for your helpful suggestions!

> In order to explicitly enable parsing "Hello" as name as well, tweak the parser rule for persons in this way:

Author: fixed

In order to explicitly enable parsing "Hello" as name as well, modify the parser rule for persons in this way:

```langium
Person: 'person' name=(ID | 'Hello');
terminal ID: /[_a-zA-Z][\w_]*/; // the terminal rule for ID is unchanged!
```

> Now Langium knows, that keyword "Hello" may also occur as value for the `name` property of the parser rule for persons.

Reviewer: "in front of _that_ there is no comma"
```suggestion
Now Langium knows that keyword "Hello" may also occur as value for the `name` property of the parser rule for persons.
```

Author: done

![screenshot with fixed grammar](fixed-1-grammar.png)

> Since the `name` property is used for cross-references by the parser rule for greetings, "Hello" needs to be supported here as well. For that, we recommend to introduce a [data type rule](/docs/grammar-language/#data-type-rules) like "PersonID" in the example, since it makes it easier to support more keywords in the future:

Author: changed

Since the `name` property is used for cross-references by the parser rule for greetings, "Hello" needs to be supported here as well. For that we recommend to introduce a [data type rule](/docs/grammar-language/#data-type-rules) like "PersonID" in the example, since it makes it easier to support more keywords in the future:

```langium
Person: 'person' name=PersonID;

Greeting: 'Hello' person=[Person:PersonID] '!';

PersonID returns string: ID | 'Hello';
```

> Now, your editor accepts "Hello" as value for person's names.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, your editor accepts "Hello" as value for persons' names.
```

Author: fixed

> As you can see, Langium accepts "Hello" as value for person's names now.

Author: yes, sounds better, thanks!

Nevertheless, the name "Hello" still is highlighted in blue and looks like a keyword "Hello". This leads us to the second step.

## Step 2: Change the semantic type of the resulting token

The __second step__ is to change the semantic type of the resulting token in order to adjust the highlighting in the editor:
While parsing text with Langium is done in a language server, the highlighting is done in editors (the language clients).
Editors like VS Code usually use *syntax highlighting* basing on the tokenized text. This highlighting can be complemented by *semantic highlighting* with additional semantic information for the tokens from the language server.

In case of Langium and VS Code, VS Code uses by default TextMate grammars, which can be seen as collections of regex (and which is generated by `npm run langium:generate`), to split the text into tokens and assigns a (syntactic) type to these tokens. The color for highlighting the token is chosen depending on the assigned type.
In the example, a regex for the "Hello" keyword matches *all* strings "Hello" in text, resulting in the blue color even for "Hello" used as name.

> In contrast to this, Langium is able to distinguish "Hello" keywords and "Hello" names and therefore is able to assign different *semantic* types to "Hello" tokens.

Reviewer: That's not correct AFAIK, see above. It just accepts the keyword's token text as a value.

Author: Sorry, I don't see the problem yet: In my eyes, the AST is created on top of the token stream by applying the parser rules. By looking into the AST, you can distinguish, for which purpose tokens are used.

I tried to formulate the sentence more clear.

Reviewer: Right, you also right to some extend. Your new formulation is very good and unambiguous.

Author: Thank you!

According to the Language Server Protocol (LSP), these semantic token types are sent to editors like VS Code, which complement the syntactic types of tokens with these semantic types.

> Color themes are able adjust the default highlighting of tokens, which depends on the syntactic type, according to the semantic token type now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Color themes are able to adjust the default highlighting of tokens, which depends on the syntactic type, according to the semantic token type now.
```

Author: that sounds much better, thanks!

In Langium, the `SemanticTokenProvider` service is responsible for assigning language-dependent semantic types to tokens.
Therefore, we customize the default semantic token provider like this:

```ts
import { AbstractSemanticTokenProvider, AstNode, SemanticTokenAcceptor } from "langium";
import { isPerson } from "./generated/ast.js";
import { SemanticTokenTypes } from 'vscode-languageserver';

export class HelloWorldSemanticTokenProvider extends AbstractSemanticTokenProvider {

>     protected override highlightElement(node: AstNode, acceptor: SemanticTokenAcceptor): void | "prune" | undefined {

Author: changed

        if (isPerson(node)) {
            acceptor({
                node,
                property: 'name',
                type: SemanticTokenTypes.class
            });
        }
    }
}
```

For all persons (`isPerson(...)` in line 7), we explicitly specify the semantic type for the token of their `'name'` property.
Here, we use `SemanticTokenTypes.class` as semantic type.
For your case, select a predefined type which fits your domain best.
Since the name is used as cross-reference by greetings, a similar check and assignment of a semantic token type needs to be done for the `person` property of `Greeting` as well.

After creating the semantic token provider, you need to register the `HelloWorldSemanticTokenProvider` in `hello-world-module.ts` in the following way:

```ts
export const HelloWorldModule: Module<HelloWorldServices, PartialLangiumServices & HelloWorldAddedServices> = {
    lsp: {
        SemanticTokenProvider: (services) => new HelloWorldSemanticTokenProvider(services)
    },
    validation: {
        HelloWorldValidator: () => new HelloWorldValidator()

>     }

Author: You are right, that focuses on just the additions in the code, thanks!

};
```

Now rebuild and restart your application and test the improvements of the second step:

![screenshot with fixed semantic token](fixed-2-token.png)

The `HelloWorldSemanticTokenProvider` works, and you might see a different highlighting XOR you might not see any difference, e.g. "Hello" is still blue here. This leads us to the third step.

## Step 3: Ensure that your editor styles the chosen semantic token type

> The __third step__ is to ensure, that your editor supports the assigned semantic tokens:

Reviewer: "in front of _that_ there is no comma" 🎶
```suggestion
The __third step__ is to ensure that your editor supports the assigned semantic tokens:
```

Author: consistency 🙂

> Depending on your editor and the currently selected color theme, the semantic token type selected in `HelloWorldSemanticTokenProvider` might not be supported or didn't got a different color in the color theme.

Reviewer: (didn't is already in simple past)
```suggestion
Depending on your editor and the currently selected color theme, the semantic token type selected in `HelloWorldSemanticTokenProvider` might not be supported or didn't get a different color in the color theme.
```

Author: fixed

The easiest way to detect such problems is to change the current color theme and to try some others.

> Note, that VS Code allows to switch off semantic highlighting for all themes with the setting `editor.semanticHighlighting.enabled`.

Reviewer: "in front of _that_ there is no comma" 🎶

```suggestion
Note that VS Code allows to switch off semantic highlighting for all themes with the setting `editor.semanticHighlighting.enabled`.
```

Author: done

After switching from "Dark (Visual Studio)" to "Dark Modern" in VS Code, the example looks as expected.
You can switch the current color theme in VS Code with `cmd + K` `cmd + T` (or via the menu: Code -> Settings... -> Theme -> Color Theme).

![screenshot with supporting color theme](fixed-3-style-2.png)

> Now "Hello" is highlighted in purple, when it is used as keyword, and in green, when it is used as value for the name of a person.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now "Hello" is highlighted in purple if used as keyword, it's written in green if it is used as value for the name of a person.
```

Author: sounds better, thanks

Another solution is to select a different semantic type for your token in step two.

> A more elaborate solution is to create your own color theme and to ship it with your VS Code extension of your language.

Reviewer: I would not mention that here as users would have to pro-actively select the specific color theme, wouldn't they?

Author: You are right, that seems to be not supported by VS Code according to https://github.com/Microsoft/vscode/issues/20652.

While __step one__ is mandatory to enable keywords as values in general,
__step two__ improves the user experience of your language.
While step one and step two can be handled in the LSP server once for your language, __step three__ highly depends on your editor and its color themes (in the LSP clients), which makes step three quite complicated to handle.

> Now you have learned how to technically enable keywords as regular values for properties.

Author: changed

> Now you have learned, how to technically enable keywords as regular values for properties.

Reviewer: IMO this comma is also superfluous/wrong, as there's neither a noun nor a verb in the subsequent part of the sentence.

Author: After checking again, I would say that the comma is wrong, since the sentence starts with the main clause and not with the subordinate clause.

I removed the comma.

> Now you know, how to technically enable keywords as regular values for properties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you have learned how to technically enable keywords as regular values for properties.
```

Author: thanks

> As home work, it is your task to enable the keyword "person" as name for persons in the example.

Reviewer: 😉
```suggestion
Feel free to enable the keyword "person" as name for persons in the example on your own.
```

Author: sounds better, thanks

> Whether it makes sense to support keywords as values in your language at all is up to you to discuss with the users of your language!

Reviewer: I would phrase that in this way:

Word to the wise: Enabling certain strings to be used interchangeably as keywords and identifiers/values is possible but has some costs. It always needs to be evaluated per case whether accepting the costs is required and worth it.

Author: Thanks, I added this hint regarding the costs. I adapted my previous sentence, since the user experience is another important aspect here.

Some hints beyond this guide:

- In [multi-grammar projects](/guides/multiple-languages), only keywords of the included grammars are affected by this general problem, but not keywords of other languages or Langium grammar files.

> - To get an overview about the keywords of your language, look into the generated TextMate grammar `*.tmLanguage.json` and search for the pattern named `keyword.control.*`. which contains a regex with the keywords.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In order to get an overview about the keywords of your language, have a look into the generated TextMate grammar `*.tmLanguage.json` and search for the pattern named `keyword.control.*`, which contains a regex with the keywords.
```

Author: thanks

- Read about the concept of semantic tokens in the [Language Server Protocol](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textDocument_semanticTokens) (LSP) including predefined semantic types for tokens.

> - Read, how [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/api/language-extensions/semantic-highlight-guide) realizes semantic highlighting using semantic tokens.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Read about how [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/api/language-extensions/semantic-highlight-guide) realizes semantic highlighting using semantic tokens.
```

Author: fixed
